the best Christmas my children ever had
was also the worst Christmas my husband
and I ever had
Elizabeth age 7 and her brother Ian age
5 couldn't imagine why they were getting
everything they wanted for Christmas
the reason Santa was so generous was
because something my husband Pat and I
knew and the kids couldn't comprehend
something that we had just learned and
it terrified us this was 1994 and the
story actually starts a few years
earlier for a couple of years I had
noticed a rash on the sides of
Elizabeth's neck that looked like
prickly heat for those same years my
father and brother both died of cancer
and I was probably over anxious about
illness the doctors assured us there was
nothing wrong and I shouldn't worry but
I wasn't so sure and so without a
referral and paying out of pocket
I took Elizabeth to a dermatologist she
was probably just allergic to something
but why did it appear just on the sides
of her neck this rash so it's two days
before Christmas 1994 and the
dermatologist takes a quick look at her
neck and says she has pseudo xanthoma
elastic him and then he shuts off the
lights and looks in her eyes it turns
out by chance this dermatologist also
trained in ophthalmology our lucky day I
am sick to my stomach
omma almost like melanoma lymphoma
cancer why are you looking in her eyes
for a skin rash ice cream and make no
sound so there it is Elizabeth has
pseudo xanthoma elastic 'm
PXE for short questions mix with fear
and erupt like vile in my throat why are
you looking in her eyes what do you know
about this how do you know for sure what
is the prognosis my training and
pastoral counseling did not prepare me
for this doctor bercovich tells us
everything he knows about PXE it's a
rare genetic disorder it's systemic it's
a slowly progressing premature aging
disease it causes loose wrinkly skin in
the flexor areas
it causes legal blindness like macular
degeneration and a host the
cardiovascular problems little is known
about this disease and some people died
in their 30s say some of the reports at
the time he then just glances at our son
and says he has it too we want to flee
back to the land of normal two days
after Christmas researchers come from a
university in Boston and they take blood
from us and our children for a research
project focused on finding the gene a
few days later researchers come from a
Medical Center in New York and say they
want blood - these are children there
are five and seven years old
don't make them face the needle twice go
and get your share from the other
researchers they laugh incredulous share
it is then that we learn that there is
little sharing in biomedical research
this moment more than any other lit a
fire beneath my husband Pat and me Pat
and I went to a medical school library
and we copied every article we could
find on PXE we didn't understand nothing
we brought medical dictionaries and
to the textbooks and read everything we
could get our hands on and though we
still didn't understand we could see
patterns and it became quickly apparent
within a month that there was no
systematic effort to understand PXE in
addition the lack of sharing that we
experienced was pervasive researchers
competed with each other because the eco
system was designed to reward
competition rather than to alleviate
suffering we realized that we would have
to do work on this condition ourselves
to find solutions for ourselves and
others like us but we face two major
barriers the first one Pat and I have no
science background at the time he's a
manager of a construction company and
I'm a former college chaplain
stay-at-home mom
hardly the backgrounds to take the
research world by storm the second
barrier researchers don't share people
told us you can't herd cats well yes you
can if you move their food
DNA and clinical data is the food so we
would collect blood and medical
histories and require that all
scientists using these resources would
share results with each other and with
the people who donated well before the
internet was in common use Pat and I
established PXE international a
nonprofit dedicated to initiating
research and conducting it on PXE and
also supporting individuals with the
disease using traditional media we
garnered around a hundred and hundred
and fifty people around the world who we
asked would you give us your blood your
tissue your medical histories your
medical records and we brought all of
that together we quickly learned that
this shared resource was not going to be
enough and so we decided we had to do
hardcore bench science hardcore research
so we borrowed bench space at a lab at
Harvard a wonderful neighbor came a
couple times a week and sat with the
kids from 8 p.m. to 2 a.m.
while Pat and I extracted DNA ran and
scored gels and searched for the gene
generous postdocs tutored us as we went
along within a few years we found the
gene we patented it so that it would be
freely available we created a diagnostic
test we put together a research
consortium we held research meetings and
opened the center of excellence we found
more than 4,000 people around the world
who had PXE and held patient meetings
and did clinical trials and studies
through all this we lived with fear fear
of the disease breathing down our neck
while the clock ticked fear - fear of
researchers so well credentialed and
positioned in a world made for them fear
that we were making the wrong choices
fear that the naysayers were right and
the cap would simply find
a new food but greater than all these
fears was our drive to make a difference
for our kids and for all those we had
met along the way and very quickly we
also realized what we were doing for one
disease we should do for all diseases we
joined with and I eventually led genetic
Alliance a network of health advocacy
patient advocacy research and health
organizations we build scalable and
extensible resources like bio banks and
registries and directories of support
for all diseases and as I learned about
all those diseases in all those disease
communities I realized that there were
two secrets in the healthcare that were
impacting me greatly the first there are
no ready answers for people like my kids
or all the people I was working with
whether common or rare conditions and
the second secret the answers lie in all
of us together donating our data our
biological samples and ultimately
ourselves there is a small groundswell
of individuals who are working to change
this citizen scientists activists hacks
who are using crowdsourcing
do-it-yourself science are changing the
game even President Obama and Vice
President Biden are evangelists for the
idea that people should be partners in
research this is a founding principle of
our organization sure it's really hard
to discover and develop interventions
and therapies though science is hard the
regulatory regime is difficult there's a
lot of stakeholders with lots of
interests and misaligned incentives like
publishing promotion and tenure I don't
fault scientists for following this path
but I challenge them and ask to do this
differently to recognize that people are
at the center genetic Alliance is
experimented in what it will take to
transform these crusty systems
our goal is to work without boundaries
that sounds abstract but for us it's
quite practical when we're frustrated
that entities won't share data data that
comes from people who gave their energy
their time their blood and even their
tears we need to stop and ask how is it
true that we could share but we aren't
we're part of the system too how do we
make it so that people can share ideas
freely so that people can take risks and
move closer to one another
this leads to a dissolving of us versus
them not only for organizations but also
for individuals if I'm going to ask
organizations or individuals to strive
for these standards then I too need to
explore my own being and my practices if
I'm going to ask clinicians and
researchers and administrators to take
risks then I Sharon need to take risks
as well I need to face my personal fears
my fear of not having enough impact my
fear of not leading well my fear of not
being enough just before they enter
their teams our kids stopped us in our
tracks and said you have to stop
worrying about making a difference
making an impact and instead like us
learn to live with disease rather than
fight it I have to ask where does all my
fear come from the kids declaration
shines a spotlight on that fear it
arises from a bedrock of love I love
Elizabeth and Ian I love people with PXE
I love people with any disease I love
people
some of my colleagues have discovered
that it is not deathly fear it is the
enormity of our loving this expansive
love opens me to great pain as I face
loss as I discover my fear I discover
that I and all those around me have
boundless capacity for love and I also
discover as I move into this fear that I
can learn many new things and find paths
to things like practical solutions as
well as the core of healing and health I
don't fear fear the way I used to in
fact lately with enormous support from
all my fellow journeyer I notice that
it's not a warning the way it used to be
I noticed that instead it's an
invitation to go forward because in it
lies love and the path to greater love
if I turn with gentle curiosity toward
that fear I find enormous wealth within
myself and others and the ability to
step into challenges that I never
thought I could
my kids are ahead of me on that path
still at ages 29 and 27 they declare
they are happy and healthy despite
having manifestations of PXE in their
skin and eyes and artery and so I invite
you us we to turn toward our fear to
embrace the things that scare us and
find the love at the center will not
only find ourselves there but will also
be able to step into the shoes of those
we fear and those who fear us if we
breathe into that fear and are
vulnerable with the systems and people
who challenge us
our power as changemakers grows
exponentially and when we realize that
working on our inner life is working on
our outer life and outer work is inner
work we get down to what is real and
gets done there is no limit to what
we can accomplish together
thank you
[Applause]